The following is a brief description of the Munich-based Catholic journals that have been examined:

The Allgemeine Rundschau advertised itself as a weekly journal of politics and culture. Its contributors included prominent political figures of the Catholic Zentrum such as Wilhelm Marx, who later became the longest-serving Chancellor of the Weimar Republic, and priests such as Count Clemens von Galen, who later because Cardinal-Archbishop of Münster. The Rundschau regularly featured Father Michael Buchberger, Rector of the Munich Cathedral, who later became an Auxiliary Bishop in Munich, and who published important guidance for the Munich faithful in the Rundschau in the wake of the Revolution of November 1918. "Was wird aus der Kirche werden?" 23 November 1918, Nr. 47, S.674-675; "Pflichten der Katholiken in der jetzigen Lage," 30 November 1918, Nr. 48, S.688-689.

Bayerischer Kurier - the leading Catholic daily newspaper of Munich, identified closely with the Catholic political party of Bavaria.

Münchener Katholische Kirchenzeitung - weekly newspaper for the Catholic parishioners of the Munich Archdiocese. In 1917 and 1918 it was largely devotional in nature, with lead articles on the Gospel reading for the Sunday Mass, and occasional messages from the Munich Archbishop, the Bavarian Bishops as a group, or the German Bishops as a group.  From late 1918 to 1920 it increased its coverage of political and cultural issues, adding regular features about events and decisions from the Vatican, and developments in the Catholic Church worldwide.

Historisch-politische Blätter des katholischen Deutschlands - a twice-monthly journal focused on political, cultural, and historical issues from a Catholic perspective, published from Munich for a nationwide Catholic readership.

Hochland - an independent Catholic-edited journal of opinion, philosophy and politics; occasionally it published non-Catholic authors such as Max Scheler. 

Stimmen der Zeit - the leading Jesuit journal in the German language, edited by a group of Jesuit priests based in Munich, appearing monthly.

Discussion:

Russia's October Revolution, occurring in the first week of November 1917 on the Gregorian Calendar used in the West, brought to power Bolshevik leader Vladimir Ilyich Ulyanov, known as Lenin. While the participation of ethnic Jews in the leadership of the Bolshevik Party was publicized elsewhere in Germany, including by the flagship Catholic Center Party newspaper, this aspect of Bolshevism received no emphasis in the Munich-based Catholic press of Bavaria during 1917 and 1918. Only in 1919 did isolated instances of Jewish-Communist conspiracy theory arise in the leading Bavarian Catholic publications. Even in the aftermath of the Räterepublik of April 1919, and the immense upswell of antisemitic propaganda in Germany following the signing of the Versailles Treaty, Munich's Catholic press denounced revolution and protested Germany's plight without blaming Jews.  It was easy to find non-Catholic authors and publications in Munich attacking Jews and Judaism in all imaginable ways in 1919, including conspiracy theories of Jews controlling Communism, but a detailed examination of the Catholic press reveals a quite different picture from the extreme Völkisch Münchener Beobachter or the shrill attacks of Deutschnational propagandist Paul Bang, a/k/a Wilhelm Meister.

This study will present the documentary evidence of this contrast beginning in late 1917 and continuing to 1920, the year the contrast ended and the Jewish-Communist conspiracy theory gained traction in the Catholic press of Munich and won the support of Hitler shortly after he helped launch the NSDAP.


The combined Jewish-Communist-Capitalist conspiracy theory was presented on the front page of the Münchener Beobachter's on 22. March 1919, Nr. 11. As to the Communist aspect, "sowohl in in Russland als auch in Dutschland die Revolution zu dem internationalen Judentum in engster Beziehung steht ..." As to Capitalism, "Hand in Hand mit diesem Feldzug gegen das deutsche Kapital" by Communism "arbeitet die ausländische, vom Judentum noch abhängigere Grossfinanz... es ist eine einheitliche Methode in diesem brutalemn Vernichtungskampf... das deutsche Kapital ist vernichtet, das jüdische triumphiert."

In den ersten Monaten des Jahres 1919 öffnete sich die Allgemeine Rundschau ihre Seiten auf dem Antisemitismus. Eine Reihe von vier von einem Dr. Hans Rost aus Westheim bei Augsburg verfassenden Artikeln beklagten den von "modern-jüdischem Geist" geübten Einfluss "in Politik, Presse, Literatur, Kultur." Der Vierte dieser Artikeln, erscheinend am 17. Mai 1919, zwei Woche nach dem Untergang des Münchener Räterepublik, bemerkte den während den Monaten der Revolution erzeugten "Radikalismus" der Juden, aber hat ohnehin keine jüdische-kommunistische Verschörungstheorie präsentiert.  Warum nicht? 

Vorzuglich: Preoccupation with condemning Jews for the evils of capitalism, such that Judaism was understood by this antisemitic author in terms incompatible with Communism and indeed opposite to it: "Die Juden haben das kapitalistische Wirtschaftssystem bis auf die Spitze getrieben. Das Prinzip des höchstmöglichen Gewinns war echt jüdischer Grundsatz; deshalb war ihnen der Freihandel ein Dogma und die solidarische Wirtschaftsverfassung ein Greuel." (S.272)

The same 17. Mai issue of the Rundschau contained an article expressly focusing on Bolshevism, entitled "Der Bolschewismus und seine psychologischen Voraussetzungen," by W. Zapadnik. The author spared no words in condemning the "Geist des Bolschewismus" als "riesengross und drohend," and said "wir müssen dem russischen Problem ins Weisse des Auges schauen," but he explained Bolschewism first and foremost as the product of the "Russian spirit" rather than of Jews and Judaism: "Was ist Bolschewismus? Bolschewismus ist der mit russischem Geiste und mit russischen Methoden durchgeführter Versuch, den Sozialismus auf dem Wege der Diktatur des Proletariats, also genau nach dem Rezepte des kommunistischen Manifests, zu verwirklichen." (S.268) Only as a an auxiliary to the russischem Geiste does the Jewish intelligencia, the "Instinkt der unterdrückten Rasse," enter the latter part of the lengthy discussion. (S.269) 

Similarly, the lead article in the Rundschau the week after the overthrow of the Räterepublik, entitled "Zur Niederkämpfung des Bolschewismus in München," while denouncing the "furchtbaren Verbrechen" of the Communists in Munich, mentioned nothing about the Jewish ethnicity of leaders such as Leviné and Lewien, much less alleging anything of Jewish-Communist conspiracy. (S.247-248)

A similar explanation of Bolschewism to that in the 17. Mai Rundschau is found in a book written in early 1919 and completed in May of that year, shortly after the overthrow of the Räterepublik, by Munich's most prolific theological writer.  Father Erhard Schlund, O.F.M.'s Bolschewismus: <em>Sein Begriff, seine Geschichte, seine Ziele, seine Wirkungen, seine Aussichten</em> presented a detailed, vigorous denunciation of Russian Bolshevism.  Schlund spared no criticism of the Bolsheviks' economic and social politicies, and emphasized the brutality and utter destructiveness of their tyranny. "Die schauerlichste Errungenschaft der bolschewistischen Revolution is aber sicher Massenmord und Massenelend." (S.38)

Yet he did not exploit his Bavarian Catholic readership's horror over the Räterepublik to rabble-rouse against Judaism. Auch in seiner Einleitung schrieb Schlund gegen die Reaktion und die Monarchisten, die den Bolschewismus zum Wau-Wau gegen die Fortschrittlichen ausnutzten.  Schlund explained Bolshevism as the product of the character of the Russian people, not of Jews or Judaism: "Der Gedanke und die Tatsachen des Bolschewismus erklären sich einmal aus dem russischen Volkscharakter." (S.44)  "Gorkij, selber ein Stockrusse, sagt: 'Der russe liebt die Greuel ..." (S.46) 

Reviewing Russian political history of the 19th and early 20th century, Schlund argued that refusals of the Czarist regime to adopt reasonable reforms [einzulenken] provoked educated, freedom-seeking Russians increasingly toward revolution: "So frass sich der Zorn immer mehr in die freiheitlich gesinnten Kreise hinein und führte sie zu den Extremen." (S.47) Then, through demagoguery to the destitute proletariat, the Bolsheviks gained support among the "untersten Bevölkerungsschicht." (S.47-48) 

Schlund addressed the current-day fears that Bolshevism might gain power in Germany, and he referred to the Communist revolutions experienced in Munich during the months before he completed his book in May 1919 (S.1, 53); yet he did not accuse Judaism of any association with current-day German Communism, nor did he mention the Jewish ethnicity of any of its leaders, even while naming some of them such as Luxemburg and Levien. This treatment contrasts with one of Schlund's references to Karl Marx where he calls him "dem deutschen Juden Marx." (S.24)

Of the four chapters in the book, a full chapter is devoted to Lenin, describing him as the head of Bolshevik Russia, intent on absolute dictatorship:  "Der Vater des heutigen Bolschewismus und zweifellos zur Zeit der bedeutendste Mann Russlands, der einen Trotzkij und Tschitscherin und die anderen alle weit überragt und der auch weiss, was er mit der Revolution will, ist Wladimir Uljanow Lenin, der Rechtsanwalt aus Simbirsk an der Wolga." (S.21) Schlund named the eleven top ministers, or Volkskommissäre, of Lenin's November 1917 revolutionary government, without claiming any number of them were Jewish.  (S.22)  His book described important support for Lenin in preparing and carrying out the revolution, not by a Jewish world conspiracy, but by the German Government, which funded him in Switzerland, provided false papers for him to transit through Germany to Russia in April 1917, and engaged him "in deutschem Auftrag." (S.21)




The Allgemeine Rundschau continued publishing articles from May to August condemning Bolshevism, Socialism and the crimes of the Räterepublik without mentioning Jews or Judaism. Fn: "Die Religion als soziale Tatsache und der Sozialismus," by a Munich priest named Ludwig Heilmaier, lead article in AR, 31. Mai 1919, S.295-297; "Die Pflicht im Wirtschaftsleben," May 31, 1919, Nr. 22, S.300-301 (discussing capitalism and its opponents without any mention of Jews or Judaism); "Revolution der Seele: Pfingstgedanken," von Dr. Friedrich Zoepfl, 7. June 1919, lead article in AR Nr. 23, S.311-312 (mentioning Jews at the first Pentecost, but none in the revolutions denounced in the article); "Von der Diktatur zur Demokratie?" von M. Gessner, Nr. 23, S.313-314 (discussing political situation in wake of Räterepublik, with no mention of Jews or Judaism). In June an article by the same Dr. Zapadnik, "Der dynamische Verlauf der russischen Revolution 1917," 14. June 1919 AR Nr. 24, S.329-332, described in great detail the events of 1917 culminating in the Russian Revolution. The article made no mention of Jews or Judaism.  Throughout, the author repeatedly described Lenin as the head of the Bolsheviks and the one in control of Bolshevik Russia. The article identified Lenin's original surname as Uljanoff. (S.330)

A lead article in July 1919 by Jesuit Father Bernhard Duhr warned that revolution threatens to cast the world into a "verschlingender Abgrund" and then asked, "Wer ist schuld an dem heillosen Irrweg?"  His answer was atheism, not Judaism: "Alle Sozialisten, Kommunisten, Anarchisten berufen sich einmütig auf den Atheismus, als das gesicherte Resultat der neueren Wissenschaft, auch Bakunin, Lenin, und das offizielle Programm der Bolschewisten von Bucharin." AR, 26. July 1919, Nr. 30, front page.  The same issue carried an article, "Der Ruf nach den Räten und die sozialistischen Parteien," decrying the continuing Communist threat to Germany. (S.431-432) Although some of the Communist leaders mentioned in the article were of Jewish ethnicity, author Georg Reismüller did not inform his readers of that fact. He criticized the Rätesystem for its dictatorial implementations, and for its "russische Mode," but not for the participation of Jews as its implementors.  

Why, unlike so many latter-day commentators, did these writers not present an ineluctable connection between Communism and Judaism in the wake of the Räterepublik?  There was no such diffidence shown by the antisemitic editors of the Münchener Beobachter: Their first edition after the overthrow of the Räterepublik, in the first paragraph of the front page, gekennzeichnet diese Regierung als "Die Herrschaft der jüdischen Bolschewisten." 10. May 1919, Nr. 15. An inside page promoted a vicious new propaganda book by an Austrian named Wichtl, who touted the older line of Jewish-Masonic conspiracy theory. (S.3) That book had been favorably reviewed two months earlier by the Kirchenzeitung, which had described only its anti-Masonic, not its antisemitic content. (MKK __)

The tone and content of Catholic publications in May 1919 was entirely different from the Beobachter.  Where the Beobachter took full opportunity to rabble-rouse against 600,000 Jewish Germans based on the Communist activity of a couple dozen, the Catholic press followed a restrained line, avoiding further incitement in the aftermath of a tumultuous and bloody time. Catholic authors generally took an analytical and reflective approach in the weeks and months following the Räterepublik.  They may very well have recognized it as classic sign of bigotry and unculture to hold the wrongs of individuals to the charge of a race or religion with which they are associated.


The first Catholic to put his name behind the Jewish-Communist conspiracy theory in a major Munich-based Catholic publication was Franz Schrönghamer-Heimdal, a former seminarian who had published in late 1918 an over-the-top extremist antisemitic screed under the title Das Kommende Reich.

Schrönghamer's artfully crafted propaganda piece claimed that the Jews controlled both capitalism and Communism for the purpose of destroying western civilization and achieving Jewish world rule. He revealed that the leaders of Russian Bolshevism, including Lenin, were Jewish.

Schrönghamer's publication of articles in the Rundschau had begun earlier that same month, with articles appearing on August 9th and 23rd.  His August 23 article "Weltensturz" went to all imaginable lengths to demonize the Jewish people, proclaiming eternal war between Germans and Jews, an "Endkampf" between Christ and Antichrist, between Jesus and Judaism. Curiously, while he appeared to use the strongest invective he could muster, the author neglected to inform his readers, terrorized by the Räterepublik just four months before, that Bolshevism was controlled by the Jews for their purpose of world conquest.  Rather, he argued that for the Jew, "Sein Gott ist sein Geld." Via Geld sollte der Jude die Weltherrschaft erreichen: "Die Welt in eine einzige jüdische Aktiengesellschaft zu wandeln und die übrige Menschheit vollends unter seine Fuchtel zu bringen, ist sein jahrtausentes Streben." While Schrönghamer revealed that the Jews lead and control the "sozialistischen Arbeitermassen" as well as "internationalen Freimaurerei," for purposes of inciting world war and world revolution, he said nothing about Jewish Communists in Russia. Such information would have strengthened his argument and accentuated its impact, but it did not appear - until the next week.

Schrönghamer presented himself on 23. August as a wild extremist to the Catholic readership of the Rundschau, expressly denying that Jesus was Jewish, "weil er kein Jude war, weder geistig noch leiblich." (S.497) This was manifest rubbish to any Bavarian Catholic who had ever listened to the Gospels at Mass or had ever honored the obviously Jewish mother of Jesus. Equally ridiculous was his claim, "Ich bin kein Judenverfolger. Im Gegenteil." Schrönghamer further marginalized himself by his wildly idiosyncratic turns of phrase and Biblical allusions.  The following passage is an illustrative example:

<blockquote>We were mostly Christians in name only, in reality we long were the eager disciples of the eternal Jew. “Wherein one sins, therein he is punished.” But soon the sleeping giant stretches, the eternal German in us. The German “Michel” with pipe and nightcap wants to become Michael, who with the flaming sword, as God’s hero, will forever drive the fallen Adam, the forefather of the eternal Jew, out of God’s pure Eden.</blockquote>

Schrönghamer was already known to the Rundschau readership as an author of antisemitic books. The Rundschau reviewed his book "Vom Ende der Zeiten" in spring 1918 (Nr. 18), his "Vom Antichrist" in summer 1918, and his "Das kommende Reich" in fall 1918. While his prolix writings of 1918 were filled with antisemitic invective, Schrönghamer did not identify Judaism with Communism. During 1918 he relied on the old standbys of Catholic and other pre-WWI antisemitic writers: identifying Judaism with exploitation and profiteering through domination of commerce and finance. His 1918 ideas of Jewish world conspiracy were bound up with Freemasonry, not Communism. Curiously, Schrönghamer wrote extensively in 1917 about war profiteering and financial exploitation with no reference to Jews or Judaism. (Dem deutschen Volke: Deutsche Kriegsworte für das deutsche Friedenswerk - Freiburg im Breisgau: Herder, 1917) By 1919, Schrönghamer was displaying his antisemitic invective in the very title of his newest book: Judas der Weltfeind. 

Schrönghamer was readily identifiable in 1919 as the pioneer of Catholic antisemitic invective in Bavaria. He was equally identifiable as an idiosynchratic extremist.  Even an overall favorable reviewer, in a 1918 issue of the Rundschau, felt compelled to qualify his praise for Schrönghamer by warning that readers might "anderer Meinung sein als der Verfasser, mag man manches übertrieben finden oder an den häufigen Wiederholungen sich stossen." (July 13, 1918, Nr. 28, S.411)

Schrönghamer published also in the MB: 11 Oct 1919, Nr. 52, S.2 focuses on selective cites to the Talmud.

Schr. again on 22 Oct. 1919 in the MB, Nr. 55, S.2, on "Politik und Judentum" - footnote introduces his new book, "Judas der Weltfeind" for 2 Marks. Excerpt of article: "Die talmudische Verheissung der Weltherrschaft an das auserwählte Volk erklärt die politische Wirksamkeit Israels zur Genüge. Alle Juden der Welt haben politisch nur dieses eine gemeinsame Ziel."

A riposte ensued some weeks later in the Rundschau, written by Joseph Kausen.


Summary: During 1919, including the months after the Räterepublik, it was discernible to any informed Catholic that Jewish-Communist-Capitalist conspiracy propaganda was the province of <em>non-Catholic</em> Kreise, that the openly vocal antisemites were found in full strident form in the <em>non</em>-Catholic press, and that these extremist minority voices were echoes of northern German non-Catholic right-wing parties and movements. When exceptions to this pattern appeared, in the form of articles by Schrönghamer-Heimdal in the Allgemeine Rundschau and __ in HPB, they were extremist and minority voices coming from outside the Catholic mainstream.

The second half of 1919 witnessed a flood of propaganda from right-wing and militarist circles primarily in northern Germany. The Münchener Beobachter echoed the attacks on Judaism, on Jewish-Communist-Capitalist world conspiracy, on Jews-democrats-socialists for their alleged "stab in the back" to the never-defeated German army in fall 1918, and on Matthias Erzberger, who as Vice Chancellor and Finance Minister was the driving force behind the German coalition government of Center Party and Social Democrats.

The Beobachter described itself as "das einzige völkische Blatt Bayern." MB, 10 Mai 1919, S.1. Its content mirrored right-wing völkisch non-Catholic movements based in northern Germany.  Its "Political Program," published on 31 May 1919, bore similarities to the lengthier Nazi Party Program that issued nine months later.  The Beobachter was an early promoter of the newly founded Deutschvölkischer Schutz- und Trutzbund. MB, 19 Juli 1919, Nr.  By summer 1919, the Beobachter was trying openly to reach out to Catholics, an understandable necessity if it wanted to gain any significant readership in Bavaria. A lead article in July 1919, headlined "Kann ein Katholik Antisemit sein?", answered that question in the affirmative, while acknowledging at the outset that many thought otherwise. MB, 7 June 1919, Nr. 19, S.1. Three months later the Beobachter presented an article under the headline, "Ein katholischer Bischof und der Judenfrage." MB, 20 September 1919.

By October 1919, Schrönghamer-Heimdal was appearing by name as a frequent contributor to the Münchener Beobachter, under headlines such as "Das Wirken des Judentums" (11 Oktober 1919, Nr. 52, S.2) and "Politik und Judentum" (22 Oktober 1919, Nr. 55, S.2-3).  The Beobachter enthusiastically encouraged readers to purchase his new book "Judas der Weltfeind," predicting all copies would be quickly sold out. (11 Okt. 1919, S.2)

Examples of echoes in the Beobachter of the three-part propaganda campaign by the non-Bavarian German rightwing beginning summer 1919:

"der Sieg der Entente ein Judensieg ist" - 21 June 1919, Nr. 21, S.5 (article promoting Judas Schuldbuch by Wilhelm Meister)

June 28 attack on Erzberger and the Catholic Center Party: "Gleich eigentümlich wie Mathias Erzberger-Ephialtes Haltung, war die Fehrenbachs und des Zentrums als solchen... Juden und Jesuiten-geist herrscht im Lande Herrmanns." 28 June 1919, Nr. 22, S.1.

But when Germania addressed the "Jewish question," the Beobachter made hay by reprinting at length from Germania Nr. 292, under the headline "Bolschewismus und Judentum." The article began, "Dass der Bolschewismus der ganzen Welt hauptsächlich von Semiten ausgeht und gefordert wird, ist schon längst bekannt," and proceeded to warn that "das Judentum muss einmal allen Ernstes an die alte Wahrheit erinnert werden, dass Druck Gegendruck erzeugt," while claiming unconvincingly: "Man möge diese Zeilen nicht als Drohung deuten." Münchener Beobachter 30. Juli 1919, Nr. 31, S.3.

Attack on Erzberger for his July __ speech in the Reichstag: "Erzberger beschränkte sich nicht auf die Verteidigung, sondern ging zu dem mit seiner bekannten wirkungsvollen Rhetorik unter stürmischer Erregung des Hauses vorgetragenen schweren Vorwurf über, dass die verantwortlichen Stellen eine Ende August 1917 durch den Papst vermittelte Friedensmöglichkeit fahrlässig versäumt hätten." MB 2. August 1919, Nr. 31, S.441.

MB 6. August 1919, Nr. 33, S.1: Erzbergers "Enthüllungen."  Der Berichterstatter der "Times" meldet aus Rom: Die Enthüllungen Erzbergers über den englischen Friedensschritt durch Vermittlung des Vatikans haben in Rom grosses Erstaunen hervorgerufen. Sowohl im Vatikan wie in politischen Kreisen ist man sehr überrascht. Der Kardinalstaatssekretär hat heute morgens den "Times" Berichterstatter empfangen und ihm erklärt, dass Erzbergers Enthüllungen nicht richtig waren. Der Heilige Stuhl wird mit Rücksicht auf das entstandene Missverständnis die diesbezüglichen Dokumente veröffentlichen." [research: was this report carried in any of the Munich-based Catholic press?]

next headline: "Ein jüdischer Kirchenfürst" - alleging that the Cardinal Archbishop Neto of Lisbon, was born a Jew in Alsace, as Isidor Netter.

MB 23 August 1919, Nr. 38, S.1: "Frau Staatsminister Erzberger!"


How influential was Archbishop Faulhaber in Munich? An example from mid-1918 is illustrative. Faulhaber protested against the immorality of a play recently opened in Munich, "Weibsteufel." The Munich authorities the issued a statement whose essence is expressed in this excerpt: "Nachdem sämtliche anwesenden Mitglieder des Zensurbeirates sich einstimmig für die Zulassung des Stückes aussprachen, da keinerlei sittliche Gefährdung zu befürchten sei, und da der 'Weibsteufel' ohne Widerspruch nicht nur im K.K. Hofburgtheater in Wien, sondern auch auf verschiedenen reichsdeutschen Bühnen aufgeführt worden war, hatte die K. Politizeidirektiion vorerst keine genügende handhabe, die Genehmigung zur Aufführung zu verweigern. Als jedoch durch die katholische Presse und die Kriegspredigt des herrn Erzbischofs am 24. Juni starke Gegnerschaft gegen die Aufführung des 'Weibsteufels' geltend gemacht wurde, griff der Polizeipräsident persönlich in der Weise ein, dass er die Direktion des Münchener Schauspielhauses ersuchte, im Interesse des Burgfriedens den 'Weibsteufel' vom Spielplan wieder abzusetzen, welchem Ersuchen von der Direktion ohne weiteres stattgegeben wurden." (Allgemeine Rundschau, 13. Juli 1919, Nr. 28, S.411) 

In other words, despite the unanimous view of the authorities that there was no moral danger in the play, the view of the Archbishop prevailed. Archbishop Faulhaber had been chosen by King Ludwig III. That choice was ratified, not made, by the Pope.  After the King abdicated, the two figures in Bavaria with greatest credibility from the standpoint of monarchists and devotees of the ancien regime were Crown Prince Field Marshall Rupprecht and Archbishop Faulhaber.  As Rupprecht largely refrained from exerting public influence, the Archbishop had singular authority not only among Catholics, but also for non-Catholic monarchists such as Gustav von Kahr. (Cf. Osservatore Romano,  


Historians have treated the arising of militant antisemitism in Bavaria after World War I as a natural result of <em>facts</em>: facts of widespread and extreme antisemitic sentiments in Bavaria, similarly virulent historical antisemitism in Gemany more generally, prominent roles of Jews in the leadership of the Räterepublik, and similarly prominent roles of Jews among the Bolsheviks in Russia.  Detailed examination of the available evidence, howeveer, calls this conventional historiographical wisdom into sharp question. The known facts of Jews prominently participating in the Russian Octobe Revolution did not lead to *any* Jewish-Communist conspiracy propaganda in the leading Munich-based Catholic publications in the first 18 months after that revolution. The even more conspicuous role of Jews in the Bavarian Räterepublik likewise failed to produce Jewish-Communist conspiracy theory for several months in the Munich-based Catholic press, even while it sparked voluminous antisemitic conspiracy mongering by the non-Catholic Völkisch press and proto-Nazis Dietrich Eckart. Nor is the "fact" of thoroughgoing Bavarian Catholic antisemitism a solid foundation for so many historians' past suppositions.  Pre-War efforts to duplicate in Bavaria the flamboyantly successful antisemitic party of Karl Lueger's Christian Socials from Austria failed miserably, polling only in single digits in Munich, where the greatest efforts were made. The "Judenwahl" election of 1912 yielded 12 antisemitic delegates in the Reichstag for the German antisemitic parties, but none whatever from Bavaria. The Münchener Katholische Kirchenzeitung did not publish antisemitic propaganda in 1917 or 1918, and ventured into the field only timidly in 1919 by favorably reviewing a viciously antisemitic book - without mentioning the book's antisemitic content.  Antisemitic material is equally hard to find in the Allgemeine Rundschau of 1918. The Rundschau's review of Schrönghamer's "Der Antichrist" mentions his denunciation of the "jüdische-römische Geist," whatever that oddly paired appellation might signify, while cautioning against his tendency to engage in exaggerations.  

<p>Theologian Erhard Schlund did likewise, making only a passing reference to the role of Jewish intellectuals in Russia - in no way hinting they represented a worldwide conspiracy. The Historisch-Politische Blätter, publishing from Munich for a Germany-wide rather than Bavarian audience, raised hints of Jewish control of Bolshevism before these other journals, but avoided putting its credibility on the line by merely citing the theory from the mouth of a north-German and presumably non-Catholic big businessman.  Hochland, with less solid Catholic credentials, having been placed on the Index by the Vatican before the War, indulged its antisemitic sentiments by publishing positive biographical sketches of some antisemitic German figures of the 19th century - but refrained from mentioning the antisemitic side of those figures.

Why did Bavarian Catholic publications show such restraint in 1918 and for the most part in 1919 even while north German antisemites, and their non-Catholic confreres in Munich, were whipping up a storm?  An examination of historical context, and a close look at the Munich-based Catholic publications, suggest multiple plausible reasons.

1. The first reason Bavarian Catholics did not interpret the facts of the Russian Revolution as a Jewish plot to destroy Germany and the Catholic Church is that they saw the Revolution as a major <em>help</em> to both their country and their Church.

The Russian Revolution was seen by many at the time as the great "Wendepunkt" for Germany in the War. "Am Meilenstein 1918," Allgemeine Rundschau, 5 Januar 1918, Nr. 1.

Impact on Catholic Church in Russia - and prospects for reunification - "Sehr günstig erscheinen sich die Dinge in ganz Osteuropa für die katholische Kirche zu entwickeln."

Later in 1918, the Allgemeine Rundschau was continuing to hail the effect of the Russian Revolution in weakening the russische orthodox Kirche, die jahrhundertelang bedrohte die römische-katholische Kirche "aufs empfindlichste, nich zuletzt in Asien, namentlich in Palästina." 10 August 1918, Nr. 32, S.453-454, "Die russische Kirche"  [footnote: conflict between Orthodox and Catholic Church authorities over the Holy Places in Palestine was a major instigating cause of the Crimean War of the 1850s, during which the Vatican's Nuncio to Vienna described the Russian Orthodox Church as ___]  


2. While non-Catholic Prussians may have identified with Czarist autocracy - Kaiser Wilhelm II, for instance, had famously sought to forge an alliance with Czar Nicholas II on his yacht in the Baltic before the War - Catholics traditionally saw Russian Orthodoxy under the Czar as other, and even as enemy.


3. For the Russians to escape from the bonds of Czarism was viewed on balance as a good thing, even by means of a Communist revolution: "Russland zerreist seine Sklavenketten" (AR, 12 Januar 1918)  

Ein Abgeordneter des Zentrums im Leitartikel der Allgemeinen Rundschau in Januar 1918 hat die Revolution zum "steigende Widerstand der Gebildeten gegen den furchtbaren Druck des zarischen Absolutismus" zugeschreibt.  From this perspective, the proportion of Jews in the Russian Bolshevik Party was readily understandable in natural terms of their strong representation among the educated and their confrères disproportionate experience of persecution under zarischen Absolutismus, rather than suggestive of any worldwide conspiracy.



4. Bavarian Catholics were well-informed that Lenin was the central figure in Russian Bolshevism.  Allgemeine Rundschau referred to "Lenin und seine Bolschewiki." (12 Januar 1918, Nr. 2)  Die Historisch-Politische Blätter called Lenin the "Red Czar." (HPB __)  None of the dozens of articles about Lenin claimed he was Jewish, until Schrönghamer-Heimdal, apparently sensing a need to overcome this obstacle as he introduced the Jewish-Communist conspiracy theory to Bavarian Catholics in August 1918, claimed that Lenin's real surname was Zeder____, and that he was a Jew.  Allgemeine Rundschau, 30 August 1919. This disinformation was ratified nine months later by the Kirchenzeitung's vicious 9 May 1920 article, which listed Lenin among the four Jews heading up Russian and Hungarian Communism.  August 1919 and the Kirchenzeitung repeated it in May 1920.


5. The large majority of writers in the leading Catholic publications criticized revolutionary Bavarian and Russian leaders for their objectionable policies, their flaws of character, and their brutality of conduct, rather than for their religion or ethnicity.  In other words, the standard tropes of bigotry did not automatically surface in these writers.

E.g., AR Dec 1918: "Zur Psychologie Eisners" - intolerable to be governed by a theater critic, yet no mention of Eisner's Jewish ethnicity.


6. Prominent writers and journals described the dangers and horrors of Bolshevism as flowing from the Russian spirit - Schrönghamer pioneered for Catholics the departure from this line of analysis as he blamed the ills of both capitalism and Communism on the "Jewish spirit"


7. Those Catholic writers who ventured into conspiracy theory tended toward Entente conspiracy or Masonic conspiracy.  Even Schrönghamer, as he developed his massive oevre of antisemitic invective beginning in 1918, echoed the Jewish-Masonic conspiracy propaganda of the pre-War decades, only later transposing from Jewish-Masonic to Jewish-Communist


8. A major factor for any Catholic writer or publication that wanted to preserve its standing in Munich had a concern over the possible reaction of the relatively new Archbishop, Michael von Faulhaber.  Faulhaber was known to be an enthusiastic supporter of the German war effort.  But the writings that established his reputation did not propagandize against Jews or Judaism.

Example: 


9. A major national Catholic political figure who had enjoyed extensive political support from Bavaria before the War, Matthias Erzberger, had become the driving force in the German Government, and he was forcefully denouncing antisemitism as of late 1919 and early 1920.  While some writers have posited a fundamental hostility between Bavarian Catholics and Erzberger, there is no evidence of any hostility toward him in the publications reviewed, until some signs begin to arise in late 1919.  Before the War, Erzberger had indeed been a highly active and visible contributor to HPB and AR.  His Bavarian Catholic admirers had much reason to pay attention to his views in 1918 and 1919, and little adverse guidance from their Munich-based press before 1920.

In October 1918, the Allgemeine Rundschau published a favorable two-page review of Erzberger's new book entitled "Der Völkerbund, der Weg zum Frieden."  The review opened with high praise for Erzberger personally: "Der Friemut und die Schärfe, mit denen alle Probleme behandelt werden, die das Zustandekommen eines dauernden Friedens ermöglichen sollen, können nicht überraschen bei einem Manne, der während des Krieges sich nie gescheut hat, seine Ueberzeugung, und wäre sie auch noch so sehr im Widerspruch mit der 'öffentlichen Meinung', offen darzulegen." Lengthy summaries and quotations of Erzberger's points concluded that the book should be certain of "allgemeiner Beachtung." AR, 5 Oktober 1918, Nr. 40, S.569-570. 